1. Class Features (Primary Spellcasters)

Wizard: Wizards gain spells through their spellbook, learning new spells as they level up. They can also copy spells from other wizards' spellbooks.

Cleric: Clerics gain their spells by channeling their deity’s power. Their spell list is determined by their domain, and they prepare spells each day from the full list of Cleric spells available to them.

Druid: Druids gain spells by calling upon the natural world. Their spellcasting is based on their level and connection to the land.

Sorcerer: Sorcerers have an innate connection to magic (often tied to their bloodline or magic source), which grants them spells. They prepare spells based on their Sorcerer level, but they have fewer spells known than other spellcasters.

Bard: Bards are versatile spellcasters who learn their spells from a variety of sources, including their bardic college. They can prepare a wide variety of spells from the Bard spell list.

Paladin: Paladins gain spells through their divine oath and connection to a higher power. Paladin spells are learned automatically at certain levels.

Ranger: Rangers can gain spells through their connection to nature. They learn spells from the Ranger spell list and prepare them daily.

Warlock: Warlocks gain spells through their pact with a patron. They have a limited number of spells known and use their spell slots differently compared to other casters.

Artificer: Artificers gain spells through their connection to magical innovation and crafting. They can prepare spells from the Artificer spell list.


2. Multiclassing

When a character multiclasses into a spellcasting class, they gain spells from that class’s spellcasting abilities. For instance:

A character with levels in both Wizard and Sorcerer will gain spells from both class spell lists, although they have to track them separately.


3. Race and Subrace Features

Certain races and subraces provide innate spellcasting abilities:

Tiefling (Infernal Legacy): Some subraces of Tieflings, such as the "Infernal Legacy" variant, provide access to spells like Thaumaturgy and Hellish Rebuke.

High Elf (Elf Weapon Training): High Elves have a racial ability that grants them the Cantrip spell Detect Magic.

Aarakocra: This race has access to the Levitate spell at level 3.

Fey-touched (Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything): A feat that grants access to the Misty Step spell and one other spell of the character’s choice from the 1st-level spell list.


4. Feats

Some feats grant the ability to cast spells or gain additional spells:

Magic Initiate: This feat allows a character to learn two cantrips and one 1st-level spell from a class’s spell list.

Ritual Caster: This feat grants the ability to learn ritual spells and cast them as rituals.

Fey Touched: As mentioned above, this feat grants a character access to a spell like Misty Step.

Shadow Touched: Similar to Fey Touched, this feat grants access to a spell like Invisibility.


5. Magic Items

Certain magic items can grant spellcasting abilities:

Wand of Fireballs: Grants the user the ability to cast the Fireball spell.

Robe of the Archmagi: May provide extra spells or enhance the user's ability to cast spells.

Spell Scrolls: Spell scrolls allow a character to cast a spell from the scroll once (and sometimes permanently learn the spell if they are capable of doing so).


6. Spellcasting through Pact or Patron

Warlock’s Pact Magic: Warlocks can gain spells through their pact with a patron, such as The Fiend or The Archfey. Each pact grants specific spell lists and abilities.

Pact Boon: Some Warlock subclasses provide additional spells tied to a specific boon, like the Pact of the Tome.


7. Class Features or Abilities (Non-spellcasting Classes)

Some non-spellcasting classes or subclasses can gain spellcasting abilities through specific features:

Eldritch Knight (Fighter subclass): Fighters who choose the Eldritch Knight subclass gain access to a limited selection of spells, typically from the Wizard spell list.

Arcane Trickster (Rogue subclass): Rogues who choose the Arcane Trickster subclass gain access to spells, primarily from the Wizard list.


8. Spells Gained from Other Classes

Unseen Servant (Magic Item): Some magic items, like the Unseen Servant spell scroll or Bag of Tricks, can temporarily give a character access to spells.


9. Temporary Effects or Environmental Conditions

Wish spell: This legendary spell can potentially grant the character a permanent or temporary spellcasting ability or spell, depending on the nature of the wish.


10. Backgrounds (Limited Access)

Certain backgrounds or feature sets may grant limited spells or magical abilities:

Sage: Often tied to specific classes like Wizard, this background can provide access to useful knowledge that might help cast or understand spells, but not actual spellcasting abilities.